<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>JanSharp Packages</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles.css"/>
    <link rel="icon" type="image/x-icon" href="../images/favicon.png"/>
    <script>
      var listingUrl = "https://gist.githubusercontent.com/JanSharp/a69f1861bc23acb1e1c157f715de62bc/raw/vcclisting.json"
    </script>
    <script src="listing.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body onload="startLoadListing();">
    <div class="content">

      <p><a href="../index.xhtml">Home</a></p>

      <h1 class="centered">JanSharp Packages</h1>
      <p class="centered"><code id="listingId" title="The id of the listing."></code></p>

      <br/>

      <table>
        <thead>
          <tr>
            <th class="sortButton" id="nameHeader" onclick="toggleNameSort();">Name</th>
            <th class="sortButton" id="descriptionHeader" onclick="toggleDescriptionSort();">Description</th>
            <th class="sortButton" id="idHeader" onclick="toggleIdSort();">Id</th>
            <th class="sortButton" id="versionHeader" onclick="toggleVersionSort();">Version</th>
            <th
              title="Formatted using ISO 8601, but in your local time."
              class="sortButton"
              id="updatedOnHeader"
              onclick="toggleUpdatedOnSort();"
            >
              Updated On
            </th>
            <th>Changelog</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody id="tableBody"></tbody>
      </table>

      <p id="loading"><i>
        Loading... The above list and the listing id are populated by script using the listing json
        itself. If you can actually read this text then something very, very most likely went wrong.
        Try again maybe once or twice. Press F12 and check the console if there's no error message
        below.
      </i></p>

      <p id="errorOutput"></p>

      <noscript>
        The list of packages above is populated by script, but if you don't care about what packages
        are included in this listing you can also just follow the instructions above to add the
        listing to the VCC packages there. Unfortunately when using vpm, there's no way to list
        packages at the moment. I mean in general the tool is missing a lot of features, which is
        annoying, but when not using Windows we just have to use it. (As of 2023-07-14)
      </noscript>

      <br/>

      <h1 id="AddingRepo">
        <a href="#AddingRepo" class="headerLink">
          Adding Repo
        </a>
      </h1>

      <p>
        If you are using the VCC (GUI), you can <b><a id="vccAdd">click here to add to VCC</a></b>.
        (Or, if you prefer,
        <a onclick="copyUrlToClipboard();" id="vccCopy">copy the listing url to clipboard</a>
        and do it <a href="https://vcc.docs.vrchat.com/guides/community-repositories">manually</a>.)
      </p>
      <p>If you are using the VPM (command line tool), you can run <code id="vpmAdd"></code>
        <a onclick="copyVPMAddToClipboard();" id="vpmCopy">copy to clipboard</a>.
      </p>
      <script>
        const vccAdd = document.getElementById("vccAdd");
        vccAdd.setAttribute("href", "vcc://vpm/addRepo?url=" + encodeURIComponent(listingUrl));
        var copyUrlToClipboard = () => navigator.clipboard.writeText(listingUrl);
        const vccCopy = document.getElementById("vccCopy");
        vccCopy.setAttribute("title", listingUrl);

        const command = "vpm add repo " + listingUrl;
        const vpm = document.getElementById("vpmAdd");
        vpm.innerText = command;
        var copyVPMAddToClipboard = () => navigator.clipboard.writeText(command);
        const vpmCopy = document.getElementById("vpmCopy");
        vpmCopy.setAttribute("title", command);
      </script>

      <br/>

      <h1 id="Deprecated">
        <a href="#Deprecated" class="headerLink">
          Deprecated?
        </a>
      </h1>

      <p>
        So with Unity pulling their installation fee stunt it's become blatantly obvious that we
        cannot trust Unity. I'm in a fortunate position where I do not require Unity for anything I
        do, except for working on these packages as a hobby and to help others. With that in mind,
        I've uninstalled Unity and deleted my account. Unfortunate, truly, because overall I did
        enjoy working on these packages and helping others create worlds. I was even in the middle
        of creating a lock step networking system was tons of fun.
      </p>
      <p>
        But clearly I cannot do any of that anymore, so chances for more packages or feature updates
        to any of the packages are incredibly slim. They're not fully deprecated however, because I
        will try to the best of my ability keep their dependencies up to date and fix issues if
        possible.
      </p>

      <br/>
      <br/>
      <br/>

      <p>
        (Note that JanSharp wrote the following paragraphs, therefore the references to "I". This
        note mostly exists for when someone used this page as a template for their own listing.
        Speaking of, if you'd like to use this as a template and the same publish workflow, see
        <a href="https://github.com/JanSharp/VPMPublish">VPMPublish</a>.)
      </p>

      <h1 id="InstallingUpdatingAndRemoving">
        <a href="#InstallingUpdatingAndRemoving" class="headerLink">
          Installing, Updating and Removing
        </a>
      </h1>

      <p>
        <b>Important:</b> I'd highly recommend to have the Unity editor closed while messing with
        the packages in any way. This includes <b>not</b> using the package resolver editor window
        in Unity, as you can easily get into broken states of the project where the window itself
        wouldn't work anymore to fix it, forcing you to close the project and do it outside anyway.
        Additionally, said editor window, and the VPM Package Resolver in general, is very much
        broken with custom VCC listings at the time of writing this (2023-07-16).
      </p>

      <h2 id="UsingVCC"><a href="#UsingVCC" class="headerLink">Using VCC</a></h2>

      <p>
        All I can really do is refer you to
        <a href="https://vcc.docs.vrchat.com/guides/community-repositories">
          this small, mostly unrelated guide
        </a>
        because I myself do not (and cannot) use the VCC. My hope and guess is that the GUI is self
        explanatory, therefore there's no need for documentation. One of the few times where there
        being no documentation it could actually be a good thing.
      </p>

      <h2 id="UsingVPM"><a href="#UsingVPM" class="headerLink">Using VPM</a></h2>

      <p>First of all, note that all of this was written on 2023-07-16.</p>
      <p>
        <b>Important:</b> Make sure your current working directory is the root of the unity project
        when running <code>vpm</code> commands which use or affect a unity project, so most of them.
      </p>
      <p>
        <b>Adding</b> the <b>listing</b> using <code>vpm</code> is already explained at the top of the
        page.
      </p>
      <p>
        <b>Adding</b> a <b>package</b> to a project do <code>vpm add package id</code> where
        <code>id</code> is the id from the column in the list of the packages on this page.
      </p>
      <p>
        To <b>update</b> packages using <code>vpm</code>, it would be great if there was a way to
        check for updates and just update all packages in a repository. But that doesn't exist. It
        would also be great to have an "update" command to remove the current version of a package
        and add a new version of it to a project. But that doesn't exist.
      </p>
      <p>
        So what do we do? Well quite honestly, since there's no way to check for updates, best I can
        give you is looking at the version of the packages you have installed and comparing those
        versions with the versions listed on this page. You can sort by Updated On to make this
        easier. In order to find the version you've currently got installed, the easiest way is
        probably to open the built in package manager window in Unity and look at the installed
        packages there.
        (Go to Window => Package Manager => wait => top left dropdown => In Project, now you can see
        which packages you've installed an their version.)
      </p>
      <p>
        Once you know if there's an update you'd like to do, you'll have to close Unity, open a
        terminal in the root of the Unity project and then run <code>vpm add package id</code> where
        id is the Id listed in the list of packages on this page. If you're updating a package that
        isn't on this listing, like an official package, you can see the id ("Name") of the package
        also in the package manager. Just click on it in the list and see the Name field.
        Alternatively you can check the folder names in the Packages folder.
      </p>
      <p>
        If running <code>vpm add package id</code> didn't actually update the package, so you still
        have the old version after doing so, try deleting the package's folder from the Packages
        folder in the unity project and retry. If that doesn't work, try removing the package from
        the <code>vpm-manifest.json</code> file, also in the Packages folder (make sure it's still
        valid json, no trailing commas) and try again.
      </p>
      <p>
        To <b>remove</b> a package, wouldn't it be nice to have a remove command? ... Anyway
        navigate to the Packages folder in the Unity project and delete the folder of the package.
        However the VRChat Package Resolver would prompt you that a package is missing when opening
        the project again, so before opening it again open the <code>vpm-manifest.json</code> file,
        also in the Packages folder, and in the <code>"locked"</code> section, find the entry for
        the package you're removing and remove it. Make sure the resulting json is valid, most
        notably make sure there is no trailing commas.
      </p>
      
      <h2 id="InstallingAnOlderVersion">
        <a href="#InstallingAnOlderVersion" class="headerLink">Installing an older version</a>
      </h2>

      <p>
        Ha! Funny joke. Pretty much everything with VRChat is rolling release. Installing an older
        version is simply pain. Fun fact, at the time of writing this (2023-07-16), since the VPM
        Package Resolver is broken with custom VCC listings, you literally can't even clone some
        project and then have it install the the packages that were used. It just doesn't work. Also
        don't be surprised when you click on the "Show me what's missing" button when opening Unity
        and it doesn't open the window, and there being errors when clicking "Ok" instead. Don't
        bother with it, just do everything yourself.
      </p>
      <p>
        Still here? So you actually want to install an older version. Well I can't say if it's
        possible using VCC, but I'd be kind of surprised if it gave you that option. I can tell you
        though that it's truly impossible using the <code>vpm</code> command line tool. So with "do
        it yourself", I truly mean it. Download the zip file from the github release for the version
        you'd like to install, unpack it and put it in the Packages folder. Then manually add it to
        the <code>vpm-manifest.json</code> file, though honestly that's just done in the hopes of
        the system getting better in the future, so we're doing it "properly". For the record, I
        have not tested this, it's just what would make the most sense.
        Also if you need an older version of a package that isn't on this listing and you can't find
        a manual download, you can manually open the listing's json file that you used when adding
        the repo (no there's no way to use <code>vpm</code> to list the urls of the repos), search
        through that json file and use the "url" link which is a direct download link of a package.
        To find the listing urls, on Linux, and probably MacOS, you can look at the folder
        <code>~/.local/share/VRChatCreatorCompanion</code>, where there's a settings file, and other
        folders with more files, like cache files and such. I'm not saying exactly how this is layed
        out because chances of this changing are very high. On windows, the folder may be in AppData
        or in the user directory somewhere.
      </p>

      <h1 id="UnityKeepsPromptingMeAboutMissingPackages">
        <a href="#UnityKeepsPromptingMeAboutMissingPackages" class="headerLink">
          Unity keeps prompting me about missing packages
        </a>
      </h1>

      <p>
        Like I mentioned in the sections above, this feature is broken. It both cannot download the
        packages when you click "OK", nor can it open the editor window. If you're using the VCC
        I'm assuming you could install the packages from that GUI outside of Unity, or at the very
        least install the latest version of the packages if installing the version that's listed for
        the project doesn't work.
      </p>
      <p>
        If you're using the <code>vpm</code> command line tool, then the best options you have is
        running <code>vpm add package id</code> for each package that's installed in that project,
        or manually finding the zip downloads for each version that's listed in the
        <code>vpm-manifest.json</code> file, which you can do for the packages on this listing here
        quite easily by going to the github release, but for anything else - including the official
        packages - you'd have an easier time just installing the latest version than trying to find
        the version that was used for that project. But if you need that specific version, see the
        Installing an older version section above, near the end.
      </p>

      <h1 id="ShortApology"><a href="#ShortApology" class="headerLink">Short Apology</a></h1>

      <p>
        There is certainly some salt on this page, and I apologize for that. I hope that even with
        that bit of salt I was able to help you get onto the right path to fixing the issue you've
        encountered. I also hope that the issues that I have with the systems which I've outlined
        above get improved over time. It is why I keep mentioning that I wrote this on 2023-07-16.
      </p>

    </div>
  </body>
</html>
