<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>JanSharp</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css"/>
    <link rel="icon" type="image/x-icon" href="images/favicon.png"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="content">

      <h1 class="centered">JanSharp</h1>
      <p>My <a href="https://github.com/JanSharp">github profile</a>.</p>
      <p>My <a href="https://ko-fi.com/jansharp">ko-fi page</a>.</p>

      <h2>Factorio</h2>
      <p>Here's a list of <a href="factorio/keybinds.xhtml">Default Keybinds for all Factorio Mods</a>.</p>
      <p>I've written <a href="https://mods.factorio.com/user/JanSharp">a few mods</a>.</p>

      <h2>VRChat</h2>
      <p>Check out my <a href="vrc/vcclisting.xhtml">VRChat Packages VCC Listing</a>. They're all free and open source.</p>
      <p>
        Now since this is my own web page I can rant a little bit. So the thing is that I don't even
        have a VR headset, nor do I plan on ever having one. I also do not use VRChat on desktop
        like a normal user would. Over 90% of my time spent in VRChat is me just testing the systems
        I've created, and the majority of that time is me testing networking. Because yes networking
        in VRChat is horrendous for anything mildly complex. Some of that 90% was also spent
        assisting in testing worlds for role plays, which I'll mention the the second paragraph.
        The other less than 10% was me hanging out with a very small subset of the VRChat community,
        which was actually legitimately nice. But outside of that community I do not want to even
        get close to interacting with the general community. There's many, many bad people in there,
        be it social abuse, crashers, piracy, selling overpriced (bad) work, etc. Aside from that
        there's very few open source contributors and I'm happy that there are, those are generally
        good people. And of course there's good people in the community as a whole as well, there's
        always both sides, but I'd argue that if you add it all up it isn't a healthy place to be.
        And besides, with my mindset, I really do not fit. Like at all. I suppose there are others
        with different mindsets for whom VRChat is a great place, which is nice for them, but uh
        those are people that are not on my wavelength.
      </p>
      <p>
        So then, why would I create packages, meaning write code, for something I don't even use and
        am never going to use? Well, to help others. Specifically most of these packages were
        created for Ascension Academy, and then I helped out in Worlds Apart RP a bit as well. So I
        do it for the joy of helping others. And some of the systems I can actually play with myself
        sometimes, which is basically me just messing around and enjoying seeing the thing I created
        work, knowing all the complexities behind the scenes working together.
      </p>

    </div>
  </body>
</html>
